Add documentation for creating custom rules. Closes #261 (#262)
remarkjs/remark-lint: doc/create-a-custom-rule.md

# Create a custom `remark-lint` rule

This tutorial will help you setting up a JavaScript project, and creating your first linting plugin for `remark`.

### Table of Contents

*   [Set up the project](#set-up-the-project)
*   [Set up remark](#set-up-remark)
*   [The no-invalid-gif rule:](#the-no-invalid-gif-rule)
*   [Create the custom rule](#create-the-custom-rule)
*   [Rule arguments](#rule-arguments)
*   [Rule implementation](#rule-implementation)
*   [Import the rule in your remark config](#import-the-rule-in-your-remark-config)
*   [Apply the rule](#apply-the-rule)

> \## Set up the project

Author: @wooorm 
not sure why I get this autofix for this line:

```bash

doc/create-a-custom-rule.md
  7:5-7:46  warning  Link to unknown heading: `set-up-the-project`  missing-heading  remark-validate-links
```

it only happens for this first header.

# Create a custom `remark-lint` rule

This guide is part of [a step-by-step tutorial](https://dev.to/floroz/how-to-create-a-custom-lint-rule-for-markdown-and-mdx-using-remark-and-eslint-2jim), and will help you getting started to create your first linting plugin for `remark`.

> ## Table of Contents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Contents
```

*   [Set up the project](#set-up-the-project)
*   [Set up remark](#set-up-remark)
*   [The `no-invalid-gif` rule](#the-no-invalid-gif-rule)
*   [Create the custom rule](#create-the-custom-rule)
*   [Rule arguments](#rule-arguments)
*   [Rule implementation](#rule-implementation)
*   [Import the rule in your remark config](#import-the-rule-in-your-remark-config)
*   [Apply the rule on the Markdown file](#apply-the-rule-on-the-markdown-file)

## Set up the project

> Create a new folder and enter it from your terminal. For this example I will be using Unix commands (macOS and Linux compatible).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new folder and enter it from your terminal.
For this example I will be using Unix commands (macOS and Linux compatible).
```

> Now we can generate our `package.json`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then generate a `package.json`:
```

> Create a new folder and navigate inside it from your Terminal. For this example I will be using UNIX commands (macOS and Linux compatible).
> Now we can generate our `package.json`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new folder and enter it from your terminal. For this example I will be using Unix commands (macOS and Linux compatible).
Now we can generate our `package.json`
```

```sh

>  mkdir my-custom-rule
> 
>  cd my-custom-rule
> 
>  npm init -y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mkdir my-custom-rule
cd my-custom-rule
npm init -y
```

> $ mkdir my-custom-rule
> 
> $ cd my-custom-rule
> 
> $ yarn init -y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mkdir my-custom-rule
cd my-custom-rule
npm init -y
```

```

> Now we can start installing our dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can start installing our dependencies:
```

```sh

>  npm install remark-lint remark-cli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npm install remark-lint remark-cli
```

> $ yarn add remark-lint remark-cli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npm install remark-lint remark-cli -D
```

```

*   [`remark-lint`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-lint): Core lint plugin
*   [`remark-cli`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark/tree/main/packages/remark-cli): Command-line interface

> We will also need some utilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also use some utilities:
```

> *   [remark-lint](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-lint): a plugin to lint markdown built on [remark](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark): (a markdown processor).
> *   [remark-cli](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark/tree/main/packages/remark-cli): remark CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   [`remark-lint`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-lint): Core lint plugin
*   [`remark-cli`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark/tree/main/packages/remark-cli): Command-line interface
```

```sh

>  npm install unified-lint-rule unist-util-generated unist-util-visit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npm install unified-lint-rule unist-util-generated unist-util-visit
```

> Because we will be working with [ASTs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree), we will also need some utilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also need some utilities:
```

The utilities are not necessarily needed for ASTs, so I suggest removing that here. You could add it somewhere else.

```

These will help us creating and managing our custom rules.

[Back to Top](#contents)

## Set up remark

With everything installed, we can now create a `.remarkrc.js` that will contain the plugins we’ll use.

For more info on configuration, see [Configuring `remark-lint`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-lint#configuring-remark-lint).

```sh

>  touch .remarkrc.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
touch .remarkrc.js
```

```

```js
// .remarkrc.js

> 
> module.exports = {
>   plugins: [],
> };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
module.exports = {
  plugins: []
}
```

> With our dependencies all installed, we can start creating a `.remarkrc.js`, which will contain all the plugins that will be consumed by the remark processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With everything installed, we can now create a `.remarkrc.js` that will contain the plugins we’ll use.
```

```

> Then, in our `package.json`, let's add the following script, which will process all the markdown file within our project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, in our `package.json`, add the following script to process all the markdown files in our project:
```

> For details about alternative or advanced configurations, please refer to [Configuring remark-lint](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-lint#configuring-remark-lint).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more info on configuration, see [Configuring `remark-lint`](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-lint#configuring-remark-lint).
```

```json
"scripts": {
  "lint": "remark ."
}
```

> Let's create a `doc.md`, the markdown file we want to lint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s create a `doc.md`, the markdown file we want to lint:
```

```sh

>  touch doc.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
touch doc.md
```

```

> ...and copy/paste the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
…and copy/paste the following:
```

> Let's create a `doc.md`, the markdown file we want to lint,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's create a `doc.md`, the markdown file we want to lint:
```

> and copy/paste this content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
…and copy/paste the following:
```

```markdown
## Best pets! <3

Some funny images of our favorite pets

![a funny cat](funny-cat.gif)

![a lovely dog](lovely-dog.png)
```

At this point, we have a working `remark` configuration and a markdown file in the project.

If we run `npm run lint` we should expect to see in our terminal:

```sh

>  doc.md: no issues found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
doc.md: no issues found
```

```

> All good, the file has been processed, and because we haven't specified any plugins nor lint rule, no issues are found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All good, the file has been processed, and because we haven’t specified any plugins nor lint rules, no issues are found.
```

> If we run `yarn run lint` we should expect to see in our terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now running `npm run lint` should show:
```

[Back to Top](#contents)

## The `no-invalid-gif` rule

> Let’s imagine we want to write a rule that checks whether a `.gif` file is used as an image.
> 
> Given the content of our `doc.md` file declared above, we would expect an *error* or *warning* pointing to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s imagine we want to write a rule that checks whether a `.gif` file is used as an image.
Given the content of our `doc.md` file declared above, we would expect an *error* or *warning* pointing to:
```

> ## The no-invalid-gif rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The `no-invalid-gif` rule
```

```markdown
![a funny cat](funny-cat.gif)
```

> Because the file extension `.gif` in the image tag violates our rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the file extension `.gif` in the image violates our rule.
```

> Let's imagine we want to write a rule that checks whether a `.gif` file is used within an image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s imagine we want to write a rule that checks whether a `.gif` file is used as an image.
```

[Back to Top](#contents)

## Create the custom rule

> Let's create a new folder `rules` under the root directory, where we will place all of our custom rules, and create a new file in it named `no-gif-allowed.js`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s create a new folder `rules` under the root directory, where we will place all of our custom rules, and create a new file in it named `no-gif-allowed.js`.
```

> Because the file extension `.gif` in the image tag, violates our rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the file extension `.gif` in the image tag violates our rule.
```

```sh

>  mkdir rules
>  cd rules
>  touch no-gif-allowed.js
>  cd .. # return to project root

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mkdir rules
cd rules
touch no-gif-allowed.js
cd .. # return to project root
```

```

*Note*: the name of folders and files, and where to place them within your project, is up to you.

> In `./rules/no-gif-allowed.js`, let's import `unified-lint-rule`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `./rules/no-gif-allowed.js`, let’s import `unified-lint-rule`.
```

> *Remember*: the name of the folder and files, and where to place them within your project, is entirely up to you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note*: the name of folders and files, and where to place them within your project, is up to you.
```

> In `./rules/no-gif-allowed.js`, let's import the `unified-lint-rule`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `./rules/no-gif-allowed.js`, let's import `unified-lint-rule`.
```

We then export the result of calling `rule` by providing the *namespace and rule name* (`remark-lint:no-gif-allowed`) as the first argument, and our implementation of the rule (`noGifAllowed`) as the second argument.

```js
// rules/no-gif-allowed.js

> var rule = require("unified-lint-rule");
> function noGifAllowed(tree, file, options) {
>   // rule implementation
> }
> module.exports = rule("remark-lint:no-gif-allowed", noGifAllowed);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
var rule = require('unified-lint-rule')
function noGifAllowed(tree, file, options) {
  // Rule implementation
}
module.exports = rule('remark-lint:no-gif-allowed', noGifAllowed)
```

```

> Let's say you want all your custom rules to be defined as part of your project namespace. If your project was named `my-project`, then you can export your rule as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s say you want all your custom rules to be defined as part of your project namespace.
If your project was named `my-project`, then you can export your rule as:
```

```js

> module.exports = rule("my-project-name:no-gif-allowed", noGifAllowed);
> // or
> module.exports = rule("my-npm-published-package:no-gif-allowed", noGifAllowed);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
module.exports = rule('my-project-name:no-gif-allowed', noGifAllowed)
// Or:
module.exports = rule('my-npm-published-package:no-gif-allowed', noGifAllowed)
```

```

This can help you when wanting to create a group of rules under the same *namespace*.

[Back to Top](#contents)

## Rule arguments

> Your rule function will receive three arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your rule function will receive three arguments:
```

> This can help you when wanting to create a group of rules under the same *label* or *namespace*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can help you when wanting to create a group of rules under the same *namespace*.
```

function noGifAllowed(tree, file, options) {}
```

> *   `tree` (*required*): a [mdast](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast).
> *   `file` (*required*): a [virtual file format](https://github.com/vfile/vfile).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   `tree` (*required*): [mdast](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast)
*   `file` (*required*): [virtual file](https://github.com/vfile/vfile)
```

> *   `options` (*optional*): additional information passed to the rule by the remark plugins definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   `options` (*optional*): additional information passed to the rule by users
```

[Back to Top](#table-of-contents)

## Rule implementation

> Because we will be inspecting a [mdast](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast), which is a markdown abstract syntax tree built upon [unist](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist), we can take advantage of the many existing [unist utilities](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist#utilities) to inspect our tree's nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we will be inspecting [mdast](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast), which is a markdown abstract syntax tree built upon [unist](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist), we can take advantage of the many existing [unist utilities](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist#utilities) to inspect our tree’s nodes.
```

Because we will be inspecting [mdast](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast), which is a markdown abstract syntax tree built upon [unist](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist), we can take advantage of the many existing [unist utilities](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist#utilities) to inspect our tree’s nodes.

For this example, we will use [`unist-util-visit`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-visit) to recursively inspect all the image nodes, and [`unist-util-generated`](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist-util-generated) to ensure we are not inspecting nodes that we have generated ourselves and do not belong to the `doc.md`.

```js

> const rule = require("unified-lint-rule");
> const visit = require("unist-visit-util");
> const generated = require("unist-util-generated");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const rule = require('unified-lint-rule')
const visit = require('unist-visit-util')
const generated = require('unist-util-generated')
```

function isValidNode(node) {
  // Here we check whether the given node violates our rule.
  // Implementation details are not relevant to the scope of this example.
  // This is an overly simplified solution for demonstration purposes

>   if (node.url && typeof node.url === "string") {
>     return !node.url.endsWith(".gif");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (node.url && typeof node.url === 'string') {
    return !node.url.endsWith('.gif')
```

  }
}
function noGifAllowed(tree, file, options) {

>   visit(tree, "image", visitor);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  visit(tree, 'image', visitor)
```

  function visitor(node) {
    if (!generated(node)) {
       // This is an extremely simplified example of how to structure
       // the logic to check whether a node violates your rule.
       // You have complete freedom over how to visit/inspect the tree,

>        //and on how to implement the validation logic for your node.
>       const isValid = isValidNode(node);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       // and on how to implement the validation logic for your node.
      const isValid = isValidNode(node)
```

      if (!isValid) {
        // Remember to provide the node as second argument to the message,
        // in order to obtain the position and column where the violation occurred.
        file.message(

>           `Invalid image file extentions. Please do not use gifs`,
>           node
>         );

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          'Invalid image file extentions. Please do not use gifs',
          node
        )
```

      }
    }
  }
}

> module.exports = rule("remark-lint:no-gif-allowed", noGifAllowed);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
module.exports = rule('remark-lint:no-gif-allowed', noGifAllowed)
```

```

[Back to Top](#contents)

## Import the rule in your remark config

> Now that our custom rule is defined, and ready to be used, we need to add it to our `remark` configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that our custom rule is defined and ready to be used we need to add it to our `remark` configuration.
```

You can do that by importing your rule and adding it in `plugins` array:

```js
// .remarkrc.js

> const noGifAllowed = require("./rules/no-gif-allowed.js");
> 
> module.exports = {
>   plugins: [noGifAllowed],
> };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const noGifAllowed = require('./rules/no-gif-allowed.js')

module.exports = {
  plugins: [noGifAllowed]
}
```

```

[Back to Top](#contents)

## Apply the rule on the Markdown file

> If you run `npm lint`, you should see the following message in the terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run `npm run lint`, you should see the following message in the terminal:
```

> ```sh
>  5:1-5:30  warning  Invalid image file extentions. Please do not use gifs  no-gif-allowed  remark-lint

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```text
5:1-5:30  warning  Invalid image file extentions. Please do not use gifs  no-gif-allowed  remark-lint
````

> All you have to do is to import your rule into the `remark` configuration plugins array:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can do that by importing your rule and adding it in `plugins` array:
```
